# About me

Hey! I'm Daniel Campoverde, a systems engineer based in Cuenca, Ecuador.

I develop full stack. Really mean that: from hardware design & firmware
development, to systems programming, all the way up to web & mobile development,
machine & deep learning, pure functional programming and everything in between.
I just love everything that can go *beep beep boop*: electronics, computers,
software, and also like my maths and stats as well.


## Find me

- Email: alx *at* sillybytes *dot* net

- GitHub:  [github/alx741](https://github.com/alx741)
- GitLab:  [gitlab/alx741](https://gitlab.com/alx741)

- GPG public key: [EB0E776276450F22](/public_key.asc)

- CV: [daniel_campoverde-cv.pdf](/daniel_campoverde-cv.pdf)


# Things I do and like

I've being doing this stuff since I can remember, and have used a *ton* of
programming languages, tools, paradigms, and what not; Having had a *taste* for
many things though, I'm really into functional programming, strong/static typed
languages, Vim, command line interfaces, near-metal firmware, native mobile,
*NIX.

Love to write Haskell for most things, including web development, but also enjoy
writing C & Rust for embedded systems and Kotlin & Swift for native mobile
development. Security and system administration on GNU/Linux and FreeBSD too.

Like to make simple illustrations and vector graphics for my projects as well,
not exactly an artist, but a sprinkle of amateur art here and there really makes
things come to life.


## Projects

Have worked on [many
things](https://github.com/alx741?tab=repositories&q=&sort=stargazers), but some
I quite like are:

### The Venabili keyboard

Take a look here: [venabili.sillybytes.net](https://venabili.sillybytes.net).
It's a custom mechanical keyboard developed from the ground up. I use it as my
daily driver and couldn't be happier.

![](https://venabili.sillybytes.net/images/pics/alx_1.jpg)


### Dors, the emotional robot

[https://github.com/alx741/dors](https://github.com/alx741/dors#readme)

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/alx741/dors/master/logo_wide.png)


### Rune is Not Email

Currently working on [this one](https://github.com/runeisnot-email), pretty exciting.

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/runeisnot-email/rune-artwork/main/logo/brand_mark-brand_name-strapline.svg)


### Libraries and plugins

Particularly for Haskell:
[Currencies](https://github.com/alx741/currencies#readme),
[Text mining](https://github.com/alx741/text-mining#readme), [Kobo ebook notes
extraction](https://github.com/alx741/kobonotes#readme),
[Thumbnails generation](https://github.com/alx741/thumbnail-polish#readme), [Web
alerts](https://github.com/alx741/alerts#readme), [Yesod
alerts](https://github.com/alx741/yesod-alerts#readme), [Graphs &
Networks](https://github.com/alx741/graphite#readme).

Some Vim plugins: [Rust
formatting](https://github.com/alx741/vim-rustfmt#readme), [Behaviour Driven
Development integration](https://github.com/alx741/spec.vim#readme), [Haskell
formatting](https://github.com/alx741/vim-stylishask#readme),
[Yesod](https://github.com/alx741/yesod.vim#readme),
[Vinfo](https://github.com/alx741/vinfo#readme), [More Haskell
formatting](https://github.com/alx741/vim-hindent#readme), [Vim-Tmux-Ratpoison
navigator](https://github.com/alx741/vim-tmux-navigator#readme), [Haskell
completion](https://github.com/alx741/haskellcomplete.vim#readme), [Haskell GHC
integration](https://github.com/alx741/ghc.vim#readme).

Microcontroller low level libraries: [ARM Cortex M3
STM](https://github.com/alx741/stm32f1-minimal-lib#readme), [AVR
RFID](https://github.com/alx741/avr-rfid-rc522#readme), [AVR
health](https://github.com/alx741/avr-health#readme),
[STM8](https://github.com/alx741/stm8s-sdcc-lib#readme).


### Dotfiles

Check them out, pretty neat stuff in there:
[github.com/alx741/dotfiles](https://github.com/alx741/dotfiles#readme)



# Subscribe

Here, have [an atom feed](https://sillybytes.net/atom.xml)


# Support

**XMR**: 86mFdeWs5a3QE4iPPs7okm2MNfVHEiu3RGmdam82cg7AdwtLjbYyh4SU4PaU9L2kqVRUmDF9E4QR2gVLw9D5Bnqc8N3AWbX

# License

<a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/"><img alt="Creative Commons License" style="border-width:0" src="https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-sa/4.0/88x31.png" /></a><br /><span xmlns:dct="http://purl.org/dc/terms/" property="dct:title">Silly Bytes</span> by <a xmlns:cc="http://creativecommons.org/ns#" href="https://sillybytes.net" property="cc:attributionName" rel="cc:attributionURL">Daniel Campoverde C.</a> is licensed under a <a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/">Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License</a>.
